restindex
/restindex

The Earth average
=================

**[Needs revision and expansion.]**

The average temperature of the Earth, it is claimed, has increased by
0.7°C during the last 100 years, and this, it is also claimed, is the
result of anthropogenic global warming. These are two claims. Let's
examine them one by one.

It is important to understand that the Earth has no such hole in which
you can stick a thermometer and take a reading.  Determining the
so-called average temperature of the Earth is a very complicated
business. You need to use measurements of temperatures wherever those
exist, and make assumptions about how to average them over areas. In
addition, 0.7°C is a very low variation, barely over the accuracy
range of most thermometers. If you have measurements from 1850 to 1950
in a location, it is not the same thermometer that was used throughout
that period; and even the same thermometer might produce slightly
different measurements during its life.  This means that you have to
go into very complex studies, comparing measurements with those in
nearby locations (which also, of course, suffer from the same
problems), and doing appropriate calibrations. You can rarely reliably
reach an accuracy of 0.7°C.

Even if you solve these problems, and you can safely arrive at the
conclusion that your measurements do indicate a temperature increase,
it is by no means easy to generalize to the Earth average. Maybe the
earth has heated up and the sea has cooled down; maybe Europe and
North America (where there are many measuring stations) have heated up
but Africa has cooled down. Maybe the Northern Hemisphere has heated
up and the Southern has cooled down. In addition, thermometers are
usually located near urban areas, and urbanisation does cause a local
temperature increase, which, however, is not necessarily an indication
of a global temperature increase. Since 1978, another means of
measuring global temperature is with satellites, but this is also
indirect and involves assumptions and calculations. Therefore, the
alleged average global temperature increase, rather than fact, is
theory.

All we can tell you is that the alleged increase is theory. We cannot
tell you whether it is good theory or bad theory, because we have not
examined it. Maybe this claimed 0.7±0.2°C is an excellent result of
outstanding work that tackles the difficulties with ingenuity. Maybe
it is completely crap.

All we can say is that 0.7°C in 100 years is a quite reasonable
change, not especially worthy of much notice. The Earth's temperature
has never stayed the same. It is believed that ten thousand years ago,
when the last ice age ended, the temperature of the Earth was 8
degrees lower than it is today, and that 5 thousand years ago it was 2
degrees higher. A change of 0.7°C in a century is not unusual and it
does not indicate a permanent trend any more than does a difference in
temperature between yesterday and today. This is an important issue
which we will visit again later.

Next: `The climate models`_

.. _the climate models: models.html
