The greenhouse effect and the hypothesized global warming
---------------------------------------------------------

If a body is warm, then it radiates heat. You can understand this if
you approach your hand to a radiator; you can feel the heat being
radiated. The warmer the body, the higher the amount of heat being
radiated. In addition, if a body absorbs more heat than it emits, its
temperature increases; if it emits more heat than it absorbs, its
temperature decreases; and if it emits exactly as much heat as it
absorbs, then its temperature is constant.

(This is only for bodies that do not produce any heat by themselves.
For example, the sun emits heat, but it does not cool down, because it
produces it with nuclear fusion. Your body emits heat, but it does not
cool down, because it produces it by burning the nutrients it gets
when you eat. But the Earth does not produce any heat on its own.)

The Earth absorbs heat that is radiated from the Sun, and at the same
time it emits heat into space. The Earth absorbs about as much heat as
it emits, otherwise it would eventually either burn or freeze. If it
were not for the greenhouse effect, the earth's average temperature
would be about -5°C, and life as we know it would not exist, because
everything would be frozen.

However, the atmosphere has an interesting property: although it
allows heat from the sun to enter the atmosphere and reach the surface
of the earth, it blocks a large part of that heat from leaving the
earth and escaping to space. As a result, more heat is absorbed
from the earth than emitted. Therefore, the Earth's temperature
increases. Because the Earth's temperature increases, it emits more
heat into space. When the Earth's temperature is so high that the heat
emitted is the same as the heat absorbed, then the temperature
stabilizes again. In other words, absorbed and emitted heat reach
equilibrium at higher temperature because of the heat trapping
property of the atmosphere. We call this phenomenon the greenhouse
effect, because it resembles a greenhouse.

It is believed that the greenhouse effect is partially caused by
certain gases that we call the greenhouse gases. The most important
such gases are believed to be water vapour and carbon dioxide. Carbon
dioxide is produced by burning. Your cells burn certain substances,
and therefore they produce carbon dioxide, which your blood carries to
your lungs, and from there it is released to the atmosphere when you
exhale. Carbon dioxide is also produced by cars, aeroplanes, ships,
heating systems, fossil fuel power plants, and generally anything that
burns fossil fuel (that is, coal, natural gas, and oil) or anything
else.

The usual claim is that the earth is warming because of the increase
in carbon dioxide produced by human activities, namely the burning of
fossil fuel. The reasoning is that since carbon dioxide is a
greenhouse gas, more carbon dioxide in the atmosphere will result in a
stronger greenhouse effect, which will raise the Earth's temperature.

The calculation of future Earth temperature
-------------------------------------------

The scientists who make claims about the future Earth temperature use
sets of mathematical formulas which allegedly produce the average
temperature and rainfall as a function of incoming heat from the sun,
carbon dioxide concentration in the atmosphere, and many more
variables.  These sets of formulas are called **climate models**.

In order to explain it better, let's use an example. Suppose you throw
a stone with a certain speed and a certain angle. How far will the
stone reach? One formula that gives you the approximate result in
meters is

                  d = v^2*sina*cosa/4.9

where v is the speed in m/s and a is the angle. This formula is a
simple model with two variables (v and a) and no parameters. We call
it a model because it is a representation of reality; the reality is
the stone you are throwing; and the formula is an approximation that
attempts to represent that reality, in the same way that a model
aircraft is a representation of a real aircraft.

Although the model we use above works, we might want to use the
following, instead, which is more accurate:

 .                         (2*v^2*sina*cosa)
 d = ----------------------------------------------------------------
 .   9.780327*(1+0.0053024*(sinφ)^2-0.0000058(sin2φ)^2)-0.000003.086h

which also incorporates the latitude φ and the altitude h. It is
therefore a model with two variables and two parameters. Although this
gives more accurate results, the downside is obvious: it is more
complicated and harder to calculate. Although the above two models may
work well for throwing stones, if you want to throw a bomb over long
distances you may need much more complicated models, with more
parameters: you'd have to take into account the air pressure, wind
speed, and possibly the air temperature.

Climate models are much more complicated than that, and contain a
large number of parameters. A climate model consists of thousands of
formulas, and huge supercomputers are required in order to perform the
calculations.
